readings one at all Oslo Montgomery here
coming to you as always via they tryna
history podcast glad you came back
thanks for downloading this latest
episode I'm back from that Hong Kong
trip and was home in Claremont all week
but as we speak I'm now recording this
in the great state of Texas from my
downtown Dallas hotel room we're leaving
ancient China behind for a while and I
was thinking today we'll start poking
around the 20th century a little I know
we haven't looked at the Chinese Civil
War and all that happened with the
Japanese invasion and everything that
went down during World War two
there are a lot of great topics yet to
discuss and of course no small amount of
tragedy and horrific violence from that
time period the late 30s through the 40s
so we'll look at that in the future I
know a lot of you been asking about you
know when the Nanjing Massacre is gonna
be covered today we're just sort of
jumping over all that and going straight
for September October 1949 and of course
ray Harris will no doubt cover a lot of
material about China and world war 2 in
his history of world war ii podcast
today I thought we'd look at this tiny
little sliver of history that happened
over a period of about a year I thought
it might be interesting to look at the
first 12 months or so of the PRC's
existence those months just before and
right after Mao stood on the podium at
Tiananmen and told everyone assemble
bear on that historic day October 1st
1949 that the Chinese people had John
Shi Lila or stood up well this is a
disputed that he said those exact words
on that day but the official version is
that he said it we all know a civil war
was fought in China between the
Nationalists and the Communists and of
course the Communists prevailed and the
Nationalists went to Taiwan to regroup
this is probably common knowledge to any
China history podcast listener
although the Civil War sort of dragged
on until 1950 by October 1949 it was all
over and the PRC was officially
established and this of course was 62
years ago just recently celebrated
everyone in China got a week off to mark
the event and at the same time provide
some stimulus for the domestic economy
even though we didn't discuss it in
detail yet or it all come to think of it
the entirety of the period of the 1930s
and the war years in China everyone
knows from Hollywood and Chinese cinema
if from nowhere else that these were
rather trying times in China the end
officially came in October 1949 but
unofficially it was far from over the
southern part of China still had a lot
of fighting going on and suddenly Mao
and the party leaders had to face the
dilemma that strikes all great and
successful revolutionaries they had to
face the reality of now what now that
the war had been won what do you do now
the Chinese Communists were great
fighting in the hills and mountains and
taking control of the countryside but
now they were in charge and on the world
stage so what do you do now how to
recreate China get control of the
government the people how to face the
world what do you do with Stalin what do
you do about Taiwan everything else if
past history was any guide they had to
tread carefully lest they get swept away
in those very volatile times Mao knew he
had to gargantuan tasks ahead of one was
to build the political state and to
shape society the other grand problem
was to get the economy going again
he caught a break in that the euphoria
was such at first that it was easier
than expected to establish control all
the famous stories of the polite and
helpful PLA soldiers who were such a
contrast to the smash-and-grab ways of a
former warlord and later nationalist
armies and of course compared to the
Japanese
you know after so many years of being
pushed around it wasn't surprising to
hear some of the old stories from 1949
there was not only a sense of relief at
the relative peace after so many years
of war there was this feeling in the air
and all the four classes of society that
maybe this just might work out China was
not in good shape
in 1949 this was not gonna be an easy
task to build this nation rome wasn't
built in a day and neither was the PRC
nonetheless Mao had a plan
so let's swoop in and focus today on
those exciting days in October 1949 and
all the way through 1950 as the leaders
who led the battle against the
nationalist forces in one settle down
put their heads together as far as how
to pull the nation up by the scruff of
its neck and on to the path of world
greatness from January through the
spring and summer in 1949 the PLA
People's Liberation Army still around
today they just went on the rampage
against the wilting nationalist army the
greatest military heroes in the history
of the PRC all made their mark during
these days jus de pomme de vie Lin Pio
niranjan Chan II all the greats had
their most glorious victories during
this period and they've all become
immortal since then although one of
those in infamy but that's for another
day aside from all this military
activity that was carried up brilliantly
and heroically there was an entire
political aspect that was going on
behind the scenes it's easy to focus on
all the battles and military exploits of
all these great generals but the reality
was Mao and the top leaders knew when
the last battle was won they had to deal
with a lot of things at once so there
was never any better time to plan than
the present the initial idea was to
create a so-called United Front this is
where Mao embraced although
who weren't committed to the Communist
cause by any means but also didn't
support the Nationalists either these
were religious and intellectual leaders
as well as former KMT leaders who had
long given up on the Jian kai-shek
regime
you also had important overseas Chinese
PLA troops minorities from the hill
tribes and elsewhere and intellectuals
it was a nice big broad coalition many
you might have heard of this
organization in China called the CPPCC
they're still around today the Chinese
People's Political Consultative
Conference also known in Chinese by its
abbreviation the Chung in all at
that first meeting there were 662
delegates the day after the meeting
finished the PRC was formally
established on October 1st 1949 but ten
days earlier on September 21st 1949 this
august body held its first meeting in a
room located in none other than the
Forbidden City itself if that didn't
lend enough gravitas to the convocation
if you will I don't know what else could
on September 27th in the middle of this
CPPCC meeting the name of the city was
restored from the current Bey ping to
its original name Beijing of which we
know it today now this all sounds easy
that everyone came together on this day
to hold this ten-day meeting but it
wasn't this simple at all you first hit
organizers from both the CCP and the
United Front Bureau
yeah they created a bureau just to deal
with this organizing everybody and
bringing them together with the CCP the
idea was to build all this unity at this
crucial time of need and let everyone
feel they had a piece of the new China
before the fateful first CPPCC meeting
right before Liberation Day everything
had been all organized everyone who
needed to be talked to got talked to and
since June of 1949 there was a committee
already discussing the preparations for
this big CPPCC meeting and creating an
agenda and Mao had to craft the new
country's initial statement as to what
they were gonna say to the world to sort
of kick the whole thing off you know
talk about an exciting moment when I say
there was a committee to draft this
statement the document really had
already been vetted by Mao at the
innermost circle of the CCP
the Standing Committee by the way at
this time consisted of five people Mao
Joanne ly leo Xiao Qi Judah and Qian Yin
the Central Committee at the time only
had 44 members and there were only 14 in
the Politburo it was during this time
when the PLA were clearly going to be
victorious and no one doubted it any
other way
then all the leaders big and small all
over China some communist party members
some not members everyone began
discussing how to set up the new China
constitutions were studied and all forms
of government analyzed they did it these
leaders who were there at the very
beginning when the new state was being
built they had to consider all these
details and weigh all these options and
discuss and all their little groups just
like they had to do in China in the late
Qing Dynasty now was their time to study
these very same issues that Prince Gong
Li Hong Kong and others you know had
faced much earlier and they came up with
what's known as the common program the
Gong Hong Kong Ling this is what the
whole month of September 1949 was all
about to churn out something like this
it was China's first rough constitution
and who was the man in charge none other
than Joe and Lai himself so you can see
Joe wasn't someone who sort of jumped on
the bandwagon later he was an original
and remained one until his death in 1976
he was in charge so of course the
finished document was sure to be a well
polished and thought out statement and
this whole thing
they pounded it out over ten days and
boom just like that the new Chinese
state the backbone the structure basic
laws and rides and how everything and
everyone interacted the entirety of the
system established by the KMT was
abolished and then it was out with the
old and in with the new in the euphoria
and China in some places ran very high
that is you know depending on who you
were of course but there was plenty of
words written from eyewitnesses who
claimed that there really was dancing in
the streets in some places to say the
people and the nation were a little
shell-shocked after non-stop war since I
guess going back to 1927 I mean who knew
what to think it sure looked good on the
outside and never was there more genuine
period of comradeship between the party
and the so-called United Front parties
in 1949 at this great moment of triumph
everyone got along and there was a
feeling of optimism
so this common program it contains sixty
clauses and laid the whole thing out as
far as how it was gonna be from now on
and in the preface it made clear to all
the imperialist powers and the old guard
where they stood as far as you know how
China was treated and who was
responsible and how they viewed all that
you know past treatment simultaneous to
this founding document was mouths famous
essay the read me mean true Tuan Jung on
the dictatorship of the people's
democracy this is where Mao really you
know enhances his street cred as far as
a founding father and guiding light
party this document came out June 30th
1949 in this document that's you know
also a founding document of the new
nation Mao gave his grand vision as far
as what had happened and why the
Revolution was successful and where
everything was going to go from here on
out this is where he basically says you
know we can forget about Britain and the
US and the Western powers Mao said China
would
neutral but would lean to one side
meaning towards they are Soviet big
brother of course in the common program
it had a nice aroma to it because from
the language had sort of presumed that
even if you weren't members of the party
you were still included in the deal but
in Mao's essay on the dictatorship of
the people's democracy the language
wasn't so cuddly that the CCP was in
charge and would be the ultimate
authority power controller of government
and a final say an all economic and
social policy foreign policy I mean the
whole works
this was indisputable Mao spelled it out
clearly the CCP Chinese Communist Party
was in charge and made the decisions and
there was no wiggle room on that fact
the whole CPPCC back in 1949 I mean that
was necessary for window-dressing
purposes it's such a tender and delicate
stage the Communists knew they needed
these guys for the sake of stability and
for any potential benefits tolerating
them might offer but make no mistake
about it the plan all along was
old-fashioned tried and tested Leninist
centralism with the ccp at the center
and in these early days any and all
enemies were marked and quietly dealt
with those formerly associated with the
KMT were particularly marked for early
handling the CCP have been quietly
keeping records and accounts since at
least the mid 1920s so right away you
see the writing on the wall the CPPCC is
saying one thing and you know represents
a thinking of a broad coalition and the
CCP that is mounted dong saying they
could have their say but all that
matters is what the party says so while
all this spirit of cooperation was being
displayed on the outside the CCP was
moving very fast everywhere to establish
their dictatorship for most this was a
good thing but for some not such a good
thing well the day after mile declared
the founding of the PRC
the Soviet Union formally recognized the
new communist regime recognition from
Bulgaria Romania Poland Hungary
Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia followed
over the next few days
John kai-shek by the way was still in
China he didn't actually leave China
until December 10th of 1949 so he held
out as long as he could the last
holdouts resisting against the PLA were
finished off by April of 1950 when the
PRC was established factory output was
down 44% from 1937 levels food
production in a land of 600 million
people was only at subsistence level
half the railroads built with all the
foreign loans and the were destroyed
inflation had wrecked the economy and
the currency and even worse there was a
mass exodus of riches treasures and of
course people themselves were heading
for the exits to begin their lives over
in the major cities of Southeast Asia
and of course Taiwan and Hong Kong there
was a massive brain drain that happened
during the closing days and months of
the Republic of China in fact a crisis
of sorts existed for the communist
government and that there was a huge
shortage of personnel who were qualified
to act as officials of China's 600
million people at this time 95 percent
were involved in agriculture and of that
number over 99 percent didn't belong to
the party so just imagine if you will
the dynamic in China at the time 1949
1950 and 1% was controlling the 99% they
had to beef up the party membership fast
at once a massive campaign was initiated
to bring more members to the party and
the ranks grew quickly you needed a
boatload of gotten boo or cadres to
execute the party's directives and all
the nooks and crannies of the new PRC
China was simply too big so growing the
number of members to the party was an
immediate priority
and an important sidebar to everything
else that was going on at the time now
just for a little context the Communists
came to power October 1949 but good old
Kimmel song is going to invade South
Korea in June 1950 just eight months
later and China will get sucked in on
October 19 for that same year so in
today's episode we're specifically
focusing on that period between October
1949 when the PRC is established in
October the following year as sort of a
calm before the storm if you will the
CCP seized power and thanks to such
fantastic organizing powers and talents
were it counted they were able to take
control of the country and assert
themselves and get the whole machine up
and running and then October 19th 1950
China is already at war with the USA on
the soon to be frozen Korean Peninsula
there was a blueprint and all as far as
what Mao intended to do once they had
control of the government Mao had a lot
of time in Jung XI and yen on in the 30s
to think all this through but in all
kinds of situations like this they sort
of made it up as they went along and
improvised in a lot of cases it wasn't
all easy already there were signs of
differences between the elites and the
party who were the long marchers and the
ones who had been in the party since the
20s you know in the newcomers who had
joined the party in the forties the ones
who came later were you know very high
and enthusiasm but without the street
cred you know like I said so it took
time to build the party the Nationalists
had fallen so quickly in the end it was
like when the Ming Dynasty fell or even
the chain1 government fell and another
one just walked into the empty shoes
there was none of these patented Chinese
centuries of tumult and disunity in
between dynasties and it's right around
now that China's world-famous and
fantastic propaganda machine started
narrating all those famous posters many
of us have seen and a lot of the more
famous revolutionary songs burst onto
the scene everyone started calling each
other comrade or Tong jure which today
you probably wouldn't want to use that
word the mythology of Chairman Mao began
in earnest right about now starting from
here Malta don't began to acquire that
supernatural aura about him that's
something special that Mao had that junk
Ishak was never quite able to achieve
the topmost membrane of the party
leaders moved into Jang Gong hi this is
sort of a White House and Camp David
sort of all rolled up into one its
location is just adjacent to the western
edge of the Forbidden City Chairman Mao
moved into the Hall of beneficent
abundance a pavilion originally built
for the Qianlong Emperor Mao was a
passionate swimmer so he ordered that a
pool be built also the number two guy in
China at this time of liberation was Leo
Shao Qi will focus on Leo in a later
podcast he of course much later on would
become the primary target of Mao's
Cultural Revolution but in those heady
days of 1949 1950 right from the
beginning he became a practical voice of
reason and tolerance to a certain extent
inflation was dealt with effectively and
the refugee problem in all the major
cities was handled by basically just
sending the refugees and peasants back
to their rural towns and villages there
are officially 56 minority peoples in
China and many of these were insisting
and getting varying degrees of autonomy
in return for their loyalties in all
kinds of public health campaigns were
launched and of course they were always
accompanied by prodigious amounts of
propaganda and it was easy to laugh at
the simplicity of them but these
campaigns to do things like building
latrines cleaning up trash teaching
about public health this wasn't as sexy
as land reform or
some other aspects of the revolution but
this kind of practical stuff was you
know also going on and when I say it was
going on that meant in the cities only
rural China was gonna have to wait as
they always did the success of these
early campaigns wasn't as great as the
propaganda machine made it out to be but
it was a start and was also at this time
that the Don Wei came into big the work
unit it's a little different today of
course but back then you were for all
intents and purposes defined by your don
way in society your Don Wei said and
everything about you and now it too was
created and made part of the system of
control being created by the party land
reform was carried out but this had
already been going on since before
liberation wherever the Communists you
know took control early Land Reform
allowed the peasants to turn on the
landlords you had landlords and you also
had what was known as rich peasants the
rich peasants were critical to the
ongoing stability of agriculture so they
were spared at first once the PRC was
established land reform was carried out
more vigorously and again the earliest
targets right out of the starting gate
were the landlord's dark days for them
in the early 1950s roughly 40% of the
cultivatable land in central South China
the heartland had been seized from the
landlords and handed out to peasants in
this early act it said 60% of the
population had some kind of benefit from
this early land reform the stories of
land reform might make a good topic one
day and then of course women's rights
had a field day after 5,000 years or
however long women were declared to be
equal to their husbands polygamy was
outlawed as was the sale of girls female
infanticide was also officially outlawed
and with all this newfound freedom over
a million women
took advantage of the new divorce law
and women could hold land in their own
names I mean these were earth-shattering
events at the time seems so commonplace
now this was all nice but women you know
despite everything they still had a
glass ceiling and kept the role of
providing all that heavy lifting and
child-rearing and taking care of the
home the women of China weren't able to
get too much relief in that respect and
it still remained their primary
responsibility if you were in the vice
business you were also an early target
gambling prostitution corruption all the
big vices of the day felt the heat opium
was still around in this time when the
Communist authorities moved in to have
it wiped out there was no opposing
interests left to push back and sustain
this century-old blight on the face of
China in December of 1949 Mao left China
for the first time ever when he visited
Moscow to attend a meeting of all the
major dons of the Communist world on
December 16th he was warmly greeted at
the Kremlin but famously after the
welcome ceremony it was all a game of
brinksmanship between the two communist
Giants of the day Stalin and Mao Stalin
pulled all his tricks and whatnot to dis
mo and make him uncomfortable and in
fact just wasted his time not that Mao
celebrated it at all
but when Christmas rolled around he was
still being toyed with and was not able
to have a substantive meeting with
Stalin until early January and then
finally on February 14th Valentine's Day
no less 1950 the Treaty of Friendship
Alliance and mutual assistance was
signed between China and Russia
this treaty basically said if China was
attacked the Soviet Union would come to
their aid Stalin also extended a 300
million dollar loan half of which was
earmarked for military purposes Stalin
also committed to 7
dozen large scale infrastructure elects
every deal signed every agreement
entered into saw the Chinese side
getting the short end of the stick and
they were famously taken advantage of by
their soviet big brothers and not very
well known because this looks so bad the
soviets operating inside china after
this treaty had the same old hated
extraterritoriality that was you know
one of the signature traits of the 19th
century imperialist powers but with the
defeat of the ROC the republic of china
and the establishment of the PRC multi
dong knew where his weaknesses were i
mean let's face it the west wasn't on
his side he knew that fact it was well
known that although the US wouldn't go
all the way to save john kai-shek's
government they were still firmly on the
side of the nationalist so mao knew who
his foes were and what friends he was
stuck with if he was gonna rebuild china
the soviets were gonna be a necessary
evil so giving in to stalin on several
controversial one-sided demands was
unavoidable given mouse situation at the
time but this trip to Russia by Chairman
Mao was the first foray for the new
People's Republic onto the world stage
mind you and wasn't exactly the United
Nations but still it was a major meeting
of the Communist world and Mao was other
than Stalin the big cheese at the moment
so it wasn't much of a grand entrance
for Chairman Mao on the international
stage but early 1950 the Cold War was
really starting to get cold in fact 1950
it's already freezing and all the lines
are being drawn now so in this world in
the Communist world mouths visit to
Moscow end of 1949 beginning in 1950
certainly showed that he was now a much
bigger fish in this communist pond and
although Stalin was clearly at the top
of the food chain Mao showed he wasn't
bottom-feeding by any means
but still history records that the
quid-pro-quo to keep Stalin's favor and
get the Russians firmly behind them Mao
had to sort of give away the farm or a
portion of the farm and then while all
this is going on and the party is
fanning out to spread their control over
everything there was also the matter of
securing Tibet since young and inner
mongolia now this of course took time
but nonetheless it was a major issue
that the new leaders had to deal with
immediately as soon as they took control
the government will look at all the
details of this some other day and not
including the rectification campaign
that happened at the conclusion of the
long march and the yen on period in 1950
right after things settled down a bit my
launch the first one the first of many
to come the first taste for everyone of
that thing that one party states are
famous for the first ones to get it the
lowest hanging fruits on the tree of
rightists reactionaries and
counter-revolutionaries were the
so-called active counter revolutionaries
which was a fancy way for saying anyone
formerly with the KMT or the nationalist
army or anyone associated with Chung's
police and security apparatus they got
at first let's build up law and order
and shore up the security of the party
Mao had a very capable person in long
reaching to get the whole state security
apparatus in place the Ministry of
Public Security the going on and of
course Kong Shan who we discussed in a
very early podcast last year he was
around to proving very good at his job
as usual running what was the party's
secret police and during a rectification
campaign like this when the net gets
cast out of course you got a lot of
smaller fish who also got put through
the wringer and at best were exonerated
or at worst executed Joe and I by the
way was also one of the guys in charge
of this first roundup of the usual
suspects in all during the first ten
months of 1950 there were thirteen
thousand eight hundred and twelve
arrests all the procedures used to round
everyone up and interrogate came right
out of Joseph Stalin's playbook and
later on at the end of 1950 when it was
all done and Mao got the report he gave
everyone the thumbs up and he replied
quote I received your comprehensive
report on December 7th it is excellent
your policies are correct counter
revolutionary elements must be attacked
firmly surely and ruthlessly so that no
one at all has any doubt and with those
words the stage was set for the next
quarter century of Chinese history from
this early example of the su Qing fun
coming funds are ending or eliminate
counter revolutionary elements campaign
everyone began to get in line and the
importance to gun Jaedong solution or
follow the party line became sacrosanct
so today we focused our sights on that
crucial first year of the PRC and got a
sense of all the many things Mao had to
deal with simultaneously of course he
had great people around him Joanne Lai
Leo Shao Qi dong Xiao ping Chang Hyun
Joo thon many others but mom he was the
decider and ultimately all decisions
were left with him so we can see he had
a lot on his mind
1949 1950 was just another stop along
the way to where we are today with 21st
century China what began with all the
National outrages we discussed in
previous podcasts from the opium wars to
the Treaty of Versailles may 4th the
founding of the Communist Party in 1921
Shanghai Massacre Jung Shi Soviet the
long march yen on the civil war and then
today we jumped into the fray and looked
at that moment in time when the
communist leaders knew victory was
imminent and they had better
start preparing for the big time today
we saw how they sort of kicked things
off with this you know whole United
Front thing joining hands with all these
strange bedfellows then you had the
CPPCC
which still exists today the Chinese
People's Political Consultative
Conference this led to the drafting of
the common program China's first
constitution then laid down the line
with his essay on the dictatorship of
the people's democracy then during the
first half of 1950 the PLA
finishes off the last remnants of
resistance and it's all over
there's still Tibet Shin Jung and Inner
Mongolia to deal with but that comes
later and then a year after the founding
of the PRC China is fighting a war with
the USA in Korea that of course is an
entirely different topic but you can see
China got a bit of a breather but not
for long and then of course right after
the Korean War ends China starts riding
the the Chairman Mao rollercoaster all
the way to 1976 and in future China
history podcast topics will jump inside
that roller coaster and ride all the ups
and downs of the 50s 60s and 70s so I
hope that gave you somewhat of an idea
what the big picture was in China at the
moment of the founding of the People's
Republic Mao and the new leaders of
China had quite a handful to deal with
the next episode the China history
podcast is going to be iffy at best I'm
leaving soon on one of these China trips
where I'm sort of gonna be on the move a
lot so if you notice episode number 62
coming a little bit later than usual
you'll know why and so my erudite
listeners from downtown Dallas Texas yes
of John F Kennedy assassination fame as
well as the Dallas Cowboys Texas Rangers
and the NBA world champion Dallas
Mavericks
this is Lazlo Montgomery wishing
everyone a fond farewell and I'm filled
with the usual wishful thinking that
you'll join me next week for another
exciting episode
the China history podcast